DOCSP-24552 LINQ fundamentals (#42)
mongodb/docs-csharp: source/fundamentals/linq.txt

.. _csharp-linq:

====
LINQ
====

.. contents:: On this page
   :local:
   :backlinks: none
   :depth: 2
   :class: singlecol

Overview
--------

> In this guide you can learn how to use

Author: Good call. I took a sentence from the official LINQ docs and added it in here

`LINQ <https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/csharp/programming-guide/concepts/linq/?redirectedfrom=MSDN>`__
with the {+driver-long+}. The {+driver-short+} automatically translates LINQ
queries into :manual:`aggregation operations </aggregation>`.

The examples in this guide use the ``restaurants`` collection
in the ``sample_restaurants`` database provided in the :atlas:`Atlas sample datasets </sample-data>`.
To learn how to create a free MongoDB Atlas cluster and load the sample datasets
see the :ref:`<csharp-quickstart>`.

The following ``Restaurants`` class models the documents in this collection:

.. literalinclude:: /includes/fundamentals/code-examples/linq.cs
   :language: csharp
   :dedent:
   :start-after: start-restaurant-model
   :end-before: end-restaurant-model

.. _csharp-linq-queryable:

Make A Collection Queryable
---------------------------

> To use LINQ with to query your collection you must first make the collection

Reviewer: The comma would make this a little clearer by offsetting the introductory clause

   .. tab:: Method Syntax
      :tabid: method-syntax

      .. code-block:: csharp

         var query = queryableCollection
             .Where(r => r.Name == "The Movable Feast")
             .Select(r => new { r.Name, r.Address });

The documents found in the query are returned as an object that implements the
`IQueryable <https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/api/system.linq.iqueryable-1?redirectedfrom=MSDN&view=net-6.0>`__
interface. You can print the results of the preceding example as follows: 

.. io-code-block::

   .. input::
      :language: csharp

      foreach (var restaurant in query)
      {
          Console.WriteLine(restaurant.ToJson());
      }

   .. output::
      
      { "name" : "The Movable Feast", "address" : { "building" : "284", "coord" : [-73.982923900000003, 40.6580753], "street" : "Prospect Park West", "zipcode" : "11215" } }

Supported Aggregation Stages
----------------------------

You can create an aggregation pipeline by using LINQ with supported aggregation
operations. To learn more about each aggregation pipeline stage, see the server
manual :ref:`aggregation-pipeline-operator-reference` page.

$project
~~~~~~~~

> The ``$project`` aggregation stage returns a document using only the specified

Author: The driver automatically translates the methods/keywords in the LINQ queries into the agg pipeline stages. So this code: 
`.Select(r => new { r.Name, r.Address });`
translates to:
`{ $project: { Name: 1, Age: 1, _id: 0 } }`

I added clarification to the Supported Aggregation Stages section above this.

fields.

Select the :guilabel:`Query Syntax` or :guilabel:`Method Syntax` tab to see how 
how to generate a ``$project`` stage using LINQ:

.. tabs::

   .. tab:: Query Syntax
      :tabid: query-syntax

      .. code-block:: csharp
         :emphasize-lines: 2

         var query = from r in queryableCollection
             select new { r.Name, r.Address };

   .. tab:: Method Syntax
      :tabid: method-syntax

      .. code-block:: csharp
         :emphasize-lines: 2

         var query = queryableCollection
             .Select(r => new { r.Name, r.Address });

> The preceding example returns the following document:

Author: I think I naturally fell into doing it this way because IMO the page is more focused on how to translate that aggregation stage into a LINQ query, not necessarily the outcome of doing it. What the query actually does seems more like secondary information in this case.

.. code-block:: json

   { "name" : "The Movable Feast", "address" : { "building" : "284", "coord" : [-73.982923900000003, 40.6580753], "street" : "Prospect Park West", "zipcode" : "11215" } }

.. note:: Excluding the ``_id`` Field

   MongoDB includes the ``_id`` field in all projections unless explicitly excluded. 
   The {+driver-short+} automatically adds this exclusion when using LINQ to 

>    create a projection without ``_id``.

Author: I tried to clarify it a little better, let me know if it helps. Basically it's saying you don't need to explicitly exclude _id when you are doing LINQ queries like you do when you are directly querying MongoDB through the server

>    create a projection without ``_id``.

Reviewer: I think I get it. What's tripping me up is the phrase "adds this exclusion," because it could mean either that the driver excludes the _id or that it includes it (i.e., "adds it back in"). 

Is this enough?

   If you don't include the ``_id`` field in your LINQ projection, 
   the {+driver-short+} excludes it from the results.

$match
~~~~~~

The ``$match`` aggregation stage returns the documents that match a specified
criteria. 

Select the :guilabel:`Query Syntax` or :guilabel:`Method Syntax` tab to see how 
how to generate a ``$match`` stage using LINQ:

.. tabs::

   .. tab:: Query Syntax
      :tabid: query-syntax

      .. code-block:: csharp
         :emphasize-lines: 2

         var query = from r in queryableCollection
             where r.Name == "The Movable Feast"
             select r;

   .. tab:: Method Syntax
      :tabid: method-syntax

      .. code-block:: csharp
         :emphasize-lines: 2

         var query = queryableCollection
             .Where(r => r.Name == "The Movable Feast");

The preceding example returns the following document:

.. code-block:: json

    // Results Truncated

    { "_id" : ObjectId(...), "name" : "The Movable Feast", "restaurant_id" : "40361606", "cuisine" : "American", "address" : {...}, "borough" : "Brooklyn", "grades" : [...] }

$limit
~~~~~~

The ``$limit`` aggregation stage limits the number of documents returned by the
query. The following example shows how to generate a ``$limit`` stage using LINQ:

.. code-block:: csharp
   :emphasize-lines: 4

>    var query = queryableCollection

Author: Right, some of these I didn't see a query syntax for

   // Results Truncated

   { "name" : "Marchis Restaurant", "cuisine" : "Italian" }
   { "name" : "Crystal Room", "cuisine" : "Italian" }
   { "name" : "Forlinis Restaurant", "cuisine" : "Italian" }
   ...

$unwind
~~~~~~~

The ``$unwind`` aggregation stage deconstructs a specified array field and returns
a document for each element in that array.

Select the :guilabel:`Query Syntax` or :guilabel:`Method Syntax` tab to see how 
how to generate an ``$unwind`` stage using LINQ:

.. tabs::

   .. tab:: Query Syntax
      :tabid: query-syntax

      .. code-block:: csharp
         :emphasize-lines: 3

         var query = from r in queryableCollection
             where r.Name == "The Movable Feast"
             from grade in r.Grades
             select grade;

   .. tab:: Method Syntax
      :tabid: method-syntax

      .. code-block:: csharp
         :emphasize-lines: 3

         var query = queryableCollection
             .Where(r => r.Name == "The Movable Feast")
             .SelectMany(r => r.Grades);

The preceding example returns a document for each element in the ``Grades`` array
for the document in which the ``Name`` field is "The Movable Feast". The results

> are as follows:

Author: Good call. I don't know what I was thinking with my original sentence there

.. code-block:: json

   { "date" : ISODate("2014-11-19T00:00:00Z"), "grade" : "A", "score" : 11 }
   { "date" : ISODate("2013-11-14T00:00:00Z"), "grade" : "A", "score" : 2 }
   { "date" : ISODate("2012-12-05T00:00:00Z"), "grade" : "A", "score" : 13 }
   { "date" : ISODate("2012-05-17T00:00:00Z"), "grade" : "A", "score" : 11 }

$group
~~~~~~

The ``$group`` aggregation stage separates documents into groups according to
your specified criteria.

Select the :guilabel:`Query Syntax` or :guilabel:`Method Syntax` tab to see how 
how to generate an ``$group`` stage using LINQ:

.. tabs::

   .. tab:: Query Syntax
      :tabid: query-syntax

      .. code-block:: csharp
         :emphasize-lines: 2

         var query = from r in queryableCollection
             group r by r.Cuisine into g
             select new {Cuisine = g.Key, Count = g.Count()};

   .. tab:: Method Syntax
      :tabid: method-syntax

      .. code-block:: csharp
         :emphasize-lines: 2

         var query = queryableCollection
             .GroupBy(r => r.Cuisine)

>              .Select(g => new { Cuisine = g.Key, Count = g.Count() });

Author: g.Count is a method call

The preceding example groups all documents in the ``queryableCollection`` by the
value in their ``Cuisine`` field, and counts how many documents have that value.
The results are similar to the following:

.. code-block:: json

   // Results Truncated

   { "cuisine" : "Caribbean", "count" : 657 }
   { "cuisine" : "Café/Coffee/Tea", "count" : 1214 }
   { "cuisine" : "Iranian", "count" : 2 }
   { "cuisine" : "Nuts/Confectionary", "count" : 6 }
   { "cuisine" : "Middle Eastern", "count" : 168 }  
   ...

> .. tip:: Result Order

Author: Good call

      .. code-block:: csharp
         :emphasize-lines: 2

         var query = queryableCollection
             .OrderBy(r => r.Name)
             .ThenByDescending(r => r.RestaurantId);

The preceding example returns the query results sorted alphabetically by their
``Name`` field, with a secondary descending sort on their ``RestaurantId`` field.
The following is a subset of the returned results:

.. code-block:: json

   // Results Truncated

   ...
   { "_id" : ObjectId(...), "name" : "Aba Turkish Restaurant", "restaurant_id" : "41548686", "cuisine" : "Turkish", "address" : {...}, "borough" : "Manhattan", "grades" : [...] }
   { "_id" : ObjectId(...), "name" : "Abace Sushi", "restaurant_id" : "50006214", "cuisine" : "Japanese", "address" : { ... }, "borough" : "Manhattan", "grades" : [...] }
   { "_id" : ObjectId(...), "name" : "Abacky Potluck", "restaurant_id" : "50011222", "cuisine" : "Asian", "address" : { ... }, "borough" : "Manhattan", "grades" : [...] }
   { "_id" : ObjectId(...), "name" : "Abaleh", "restaurant_id" : "50009096", "cuisine" : "Mediterranean", "address" : { ... }, "borough" : "Manhattan", "grades" : [...] }
   ...

$lookup
~~~~~~~

> The ``$lookup`` aggregation stage performs a left outer join to a collection in

Author: I reworded this to get rid of the mention of left outer join. I think that adds unnecessary confusion

the same database to filter in documents from the "joined" collection for processing.
The $lookup stage adds a new array field to each input document. The new array
field contains the matching documents from the "joined" collection.

.. note:: 

   To perform a lookup you must make both collections queryable using the
   ``AsQueryable`` method.

   To learn how to make a collection queryable, see :ref:`csharp-linq-queryable`.

> Consider a second collection in the ``sample_restaurants`` database called

Author: Good call. I added some extra clarification to explain the relationship between the two (before the model)

``reviews`` that has restaurant reviews. The following ``Reviews`` class
models the documents in that collection:

.. literalinclude:: /includes/fundamentals/code-examples/linq.cs
   :language: csharp
   :dedent:
   :start-after: start-review-model
   :end-before: end-review-model

Select the :guilabel:`Query Syntax` or :guilabel:`Method Syntax` tab to see how 
how to generate an ``$lookup`` stage using LINQ:

.. tabs::

   .. tab:: Query Syntax
      :tabid: query-syntax

      .. code-block:: csharp

         var query = from restaurant in queryableCollection
             join rv in reviewCollection on restaurant.Name equals rv.RestaurantName into reviews
             select new { restaurant, reviews };

   .. tab:: Method Syntax
      :tabid: method-syntax

      .. code-block:: csharp

         var query = queryableCollection
             .GroupJoin(reviewCollection,
                 restaurant => restaurant.Name,
                 review => review.RestaurantName,
                 (restaurant, reviews) =>
                     new {restaurant, reviews}
             );

> The preceding example returns documents from the ``restaurants`` collection, each
> with an added field called ``reviews``. The added field contains all documents from the
> ``reviews`` collection with a ``name`` field that matches the ``name`` of the 
> document from the ``restaurants`` collection. 

Reviewer: Issue: Could be a little clearer. This stuff is somehow both intuitive and tricky to articulate well

```suggestion
The preceding example returns all documents from the ``restaurants`` collection. Each restaurant document
has an added field called ``reviews``, which contains all reviews for that restaurant. 
A review matches a restaurant if the value of the ``name`` field in the review document matches the ``name`` field of the restaurant document. 
```

   // Results Truncated

   { "restaurant" : {
      "_id" : ObjectId("..."),
      "name" : "The Movable Feast", 
      "restaurant_id" : "40361606", 
      "cuisine" : "American", 
      "address" : {...}, 
      "borough" : "Brooklyn", 
      "grades" : [...] }, 
      "reviews" : [
        { "_id" : ObjectId(...), "restaurant_name" : "The Movable Feast", "reviewer" : "Lazlo Cravensworth", "review" : "Great restaurant! 12/10 stars!" },
        { "_id" : ObjectId("..."), "restaurant_name" : "The Movable Feast", "reviewer" : "Michael Scarn", "review" : "It really was a feast" }
       ]
    }

Unsupported Aggregation Stages
------------------------------

The {+driver-long+} implementation of LINQ does not support the following
aggregation stages:

- ``$redact``
- ``$geoNear``
- ``$out``

Supported Methods
-----------------

The {+driver-long+} implementation of LINQ supports the following methods:

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 40 60

   * - Method Name
     - Description
   
   * - ``Any``
     - Determines if any documents match the specified criteria

   * - ``Average``
     - Calculates the average of the specified fields

   * - ``Count``

>      - Returns the number of documents that match the specified criteria

Reviewer: If ``LongCount`` is an Int64, presumably this is an Int32? Maybe include just for completeness.

   * - ``LongCount``
     - Returns an ``Int64`` that represents the number of documents that match the specified criteria

   * - ``Distinct``
     - Returns distinct documents that match the specified criteria

   * - ``First``
     - Returns the first matching document

   * - ``FirstOrDefault``
     - Returns the first matching document, or ``null`` if none are found

   * - ``GroupBy``
     - Groups documents based on specified criteria

   * - ``GroupJoin``
     - Performs a left outer join to another collection in the same database

   * - ``Max``
     - Returns the document with the maximum specified value

   * - ``OfType``
     - Returns documents that match the specified of type

   * - ``OrderBy``, ``OrderByDescending``
     - Returns results in a specified sort order

   * - ``ThenBy``, ``ThenByDescending``
     - Allows a secondary sort to be specified

   * - ``Select``
     - Selects documents based on specified criteria

   * - ``SelectMany``

>      - Projects each element of a sequence and combines the resulting sequences into one document.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     - Projects each element of a sequence and combines the resulting sequences into one document
```

   * - ``Single``

>      - Returns a single matching document

Reviewer: A random one?

Author: The driver automatically translates the LINQ query into an aggregation pipeline that uses the corresponding agg pipeline keyword in that sections header. I modified the Supported Aggregation Stages section into to hopefully explain that a little better

Author: I changed this description to be more precise on what it does

   
   * - ``SingleOrDefault``
     - Returns a single matching document or ``null`` if no documents match

   * - ``Skip``
     - Skips over a specified number of documents and returns the rest of the results

   * - ``Sum``

>      - Returns the sum of the values in specified fields

Reviewer: Can this sum multiple fields? If not, should this be "field", singular?

Author: Changed to singular

   * - ``Take``

>      - Limits the amount of results returned to a specified amount

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     - Limits the number of results returned to a specified amount
```

   * - ``Where``

>      - Returns documents that match your specified criteria

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     - Returns [all?] documents that match your specified criteria
```

strongly typed collections of objects by using language keywords and operators.
The {+driver-short+} automatically translates LINQ queries into
:manual:`aggregation operations </aggregation>`.

The examples in this guide use the ``restaurants`` collection
in the ``sample_restaurants`` database provided in the :atlas:`Atlas sample datasets </sample-data>`.
To learn how to create a free MongoDB Atlas cluster and load the sample datasets,
see the :ref:`<csharp-quickstart>`.

The following ``Restaurant`` class models the documents in this collection:

.. literalinclude:: /includes/fundamentals/code-examples/linq.cs
   :language: csharp
   :dedent:
   :start-after: start-restaurant-model
   :end-before: end-restaurant-model

.. _csharp-linq-queryable:

Make A Collection Queryable
---------------------------

To use LINQ to query your collection you must first make the collection
queryable. To make your collection queryable, use the ``AsQueryable`` method
as follows:

.. code-block:: csharp
   :emphasize-lines: 2

    _restaurantsCollection = db.GetCollection<Restaurant>("restaurants");
    var queryableCollection = _restaurantsCollection.AsQueryable();

> Once the collection is queryable, you can compose a query using 
> **query comprehension syntax** or **method syntax**.

Reviewer: Issue: Since some of the stages don't support query syntax, can we mention that here? 

Suggestion: Create a Note box mentioning that. Or change this paragraph to something like:

```suggestion
Once the collection is queryable, you can compose a query using **method syntax**. Some pipeline stages also support **query comprehension syntax**, which resembles SQL syntax.
```

Author: Changed the paragraph to your suggestion

      .. code-block:: csharp

         var query = from r in queryableCollection
             where r.Name == "The Movable Feast"
             select new { r.Name, r.Address };

   .. tab:: Method Syntax
      :tabid: method-syntax

      .. code-block:: csharp

         var query = queryableCollection
             .Where(r => r.Name == "The Movable Feast")
             .Select(r => new { r.Name, r.Address });

The documents found in the query are returned as an object that implements the
`IQueryable <https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/api/system.linq.iqueryable-1?redirectedfrom=MSDN&view=net-6.0>`__
interface. You can print the results of the preceding example as follows: 

.. io-code-block::

   .. input::
      :language: csharp

      foreach (var restaurant in query)
      {
          Console.WriteLine(restaurant.ToJson());
      }

   .. output::
      
      { "name" : "The Movable Feast", "address" : { "building" : "284", "coord" : [-73.982923900000003, 40.6580753], "street" : "Prospect Park West", "zipcode" : "11215" } }

Supported Aggregation Stages
----------------------------

You can use LINQ to create an :ref:`aggregation pipeline <aggregation-pipeline-intro>`.

> The {+driver-short+} automatically translates the LINQ statements into supported
> stages of an aggregation pipeline. In this section you can learn which

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The {+driver-short+} automatically translates each LINQ statement into the corresponding aggregation pipeline stage. In this section you can learn which
```

> aggregation pipeline stages. In this section you can learn which

Reviewer: ```suggestion
aggregation pipeline stage. In this section you can learn which
```

To learn more about the aggregation pipeline stages, see the 

> server manual :ref:`aggregation-pipeline-operator-reference` page.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:ref:`aggregation-pipeline-operator-reference` page in the server manual.
```

$project
~~~~~~~~

> The ``$project`` aggregation stage returns a document using only the specified

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The ``$project`` aggregation stage returns a document containing only the specified
```

         var query = queryableCollection
             .OrderBy(r => r.Name)
             .ThenByDescending(r => r.RestaurantId);

The preceding example returns the query results sorted alphabetically by the
``Name`` field, with a secondary descending sort on the ``RestaurantId`` field.
The following is a subset of the returned results:

.. code-block:: json

   // Results Truncated

   ...
   { "_id" : ObjectId(...), "name" : "Aba Turkish Restaurant", "restaurant_id" : "41548686", "cuisine" : "Turkish", "address" : {...}, "borough" : "Manhattan", "grades" : [...] }
   { "_id" : ObjectId(...), "name" : "Abace Sushi", "restaurant_id" : "50006214", "cuisine" : "Japanese", "address" : { ... }, "borough" : "Manhattan", "grades" : [...] }
   { "_id" : ObjectId(...), "name" : "Abacky Potluck", "restaurant_id" : "50011222", "cuisine" : "Asian", "address" : { ... }, "borough" : "Manhattan", "grades" : [...] }
   { "_id" : ObjectId(...), "name" : "Abaleh", "restaurant_id" : "50009096", "cuisine" : "Mediterranean", "address" : { ... }, "borough" : "Manhattan", "grades" : [...] }
   ...

$lookup
~~~~~~~

The ``$lookup`` aggregation stage joins documents from one collection to documents

> from another in the same database. The ``$lookup`` stage adds a new array field to 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
from another collection in the same database. The ``$lookup`` stage adds a new array field to 
```

each input document. The new array field contains the matching documents from 
the "joined" collection.

.. note:: 

>    To perform a lookup you must make both collections queryable using the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   To perform a lookup, you must make both collections queryable using the
```

     - Returns the first matching document, or ``null`` if none are found

   * - ``GroupBy``
     - Groups documents based on specified criteria

   * - ``GroupJoin``
     - Performs a left outer join to another collection in the same database

   * - ``Max``
     - Returns the document with the maximum specified value

   * - ``OfType``
     - Returns documents that match the specified of type

   * - ``OrderBy``, ``OrderByDescending``
     - Returns results in a specified sort order

   * - ``ThenBy``, ``ThenByDescending``
     - Allows a secondary sort to be specified

   * - ``Select``
     - Selects documents based on specified criteria

   * - ``SelectMany``
     - Projects each element of a sequence and combines the resulting sequences into one document

   * - ``Single``
     - Returns the only matching document, and throws an exception if there is not exactly one document
   
   * - ``SingleOrDefault``
     - Returns a single matching document or ``null`` if no documents match

   * - ``Skip``
     - Skips over a specified number of documents and returns the rest of the results

   * - ``Sum``
     - Returns the sum of the values in a specified field

   * - ``Take``

>      - Limits the number of results returned to a specified amount

Reviewer: Forgot about the "amount" at the end of the sentence. What about:

```suggestion
     - Specifies the number of results to return
```
